today's history lesson is a compelling
one because the Mercedes 500 e is a car
with a serious legacy now when it first
hit the streets back in 1991 this v8
powered eClass was an expensive rare
Groove car and it's sold in tiny numbers
but subsequently it became the template
for an entire generation of high-powered
Mercedes products cars like the CLS 63
AMG that are introducing it soon here
now nearly two decades divided these two
cars but the fundamentals are very
similar both have got big v8 engines
delivering serious performance and both
also offer effortless driving
experiences but the big question for
today is just how close can the 500 e
get to its modern equivalent
now I'm not going to claim to be a
dispassionate observer here because I've
always been a huge fan of the w124
generation-e class and as the broadest
the 500e should be the best of the bunch
but it was never that much of a sales
success thanks in large part to a 58
grand price tag back in 91 you could buy
a BMW m5 for 12,000 pounds less in
return for their considerable investment
buyers got most of the mechanical
package of the 500 SL stuffed into an
eClass body shell the star attraction
was the 5 litre v8
putting out 326 horsepower now that's
not a huge amount by modern standards
but back in the day only the Lotus
Carlton stop this from being the most
powerful saloon car in the world the car
was made for Mercedes by Porsche in zoo
fin housing and it looks like a standard
308 have been some substantial changes
under the skin including an all-new
front section and the most obvious
difference being extended wheel arches
on the road it still feels brilliant the
steering is absolutely brimming with
feedback it feels like a completely
different car compared to a standard
e-class from the period now the 4-speed
automatic transmission is a little bit
dull-witted but once you've wound the
engine up it still feels properly fast
this was the first Mercedes to be fitted
as standard with a SR traction control
now and fortunately you can't turn it
off which does rather than the amount of
fun you can have on nice open corners
driving the CLS it's clear that there's
a very direct lineage between these two
cars both have got similarly meaty
steering and both are very refined
considering the amount of performance on
offer now in the last two decades there
have been some fairly major changes this
cars
absolutely stuffed with tech everything
from a 7-speed gearbox to seats that
squeeze you when you start to go fast
around corners there's one crucial
difference though despite all the safety
gear the ESP stability control system in
the CLS can be turned off
now of course the crucial differences
that the CLS has got a 6.2 liter v8 and
507 horsepower that's almost 50% more
than the 500 II has so how much quicker
is it well to find out we've organized
an impromptu drag race
now it lost the traffic like Grand Prix
but the 500e is still a brilliant car
it's sold in tiny numbers and Mercedes
never even bothered with a right hand
drive version but it's still a very
important part of the culture of history
and this nice circularity here because
the car was inspired at least in part by
AMG's efforts to tune the w124 and when
years later Mercedes bought AMG in-house
as its own tuning wing it was set to
work creating similarly brawny versions
of modern cars cars like the CLS nearly
two decades separates these two cars the
similarities between them all the proof
you need that the recipe was a
successful one